the role of the liberal arts in various curricula.
Do you go to a good college? Is your philosophy course a good one? Is your instructor a good
teacher? Such common questions ask for an evaluation of an institution, a course, and a professional. A rating based on some scale or standard
of values is sought; to answer these questions, an
individual must have some idea of what he or she
values in a college, course, or instructor.
Some students believe that for a college to
qualify as ìgoodî it must be internationally prestigious; apparently they value privately funded
and well-known institutions. By this standard,
neither public nor local colleges can be rated
as ìgood.î
A philosophy course may be rated ìgoodî if
the instructor demands little work and gives high
grades, if the reading assignments are short and
14  Chapter 1
Values and
Education
entertaining, and if the emphasis is immediate
relevance and obvious utility. A demanding
course with long-range as well as some immediate benefits, dedicated to traditional knowledge,
may be judged a ìbadî course.
A teacher may be valued highly because of
personal qualities, such as speaking ability,
warmth, and participation in extracurricular
student activities. Professional standards such as
thoroughness, up-to-date subject knowledge,
and reasonable academic expectations for students may be ignored or entirely overlooked
when those students rate an instructor.
RELEVANCE OF PHILOSOPHY
TO EDUCATION
If we are to give thoughtful answers to evaluative
questions about education, we must acknowledge their dependence on philosophy. Educational value judgments, like all value judgments,
are debatable: Do they express subjective feelings or objective knowledge? On what bases are
particular educational values justified?
Other relevant philosophical considerations
are: (1) What is meant by education? Is it the
learning of skills for a job? Is it the memorization
of data? Is it, as Alfred Whitehead said, a collection of ìinert ideasóideas that are merely received into the mind without being utilised,
tested, or thrown into fresh combinations?î12 Is
it a process of continuous reinterpretation of
oneís individual and social life? (2) What is human nature? Which image reflects accurately the
creature to be educated? How do human beings
learn? What is the mind?13 (3) What is knowledge? What are the sources and nature of knowledge? What methods can we use to distinguish
valid from invalid knowledge?14
Different philosophical outlooks and religious traditions present contrasting explanations
of value, human nature, knowledge, and education.15 For example, the pragmatism of John
Dewey offers a particular interpretation of reality
(including human nature), knowledge, and values with definitive consequences for an approach
to education. A Hinduís understanding of these
issues would be quite different.
PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION
The application of general philosophical positions to educational problems is called philosophy
of education. One model of this field focuses on
three issues: (1) basic objectives and specific
goals of education; (2) methods of teaching and
learning; and (3) curricula. To establish a college
requires a philosophy of education, and the answers to a number of basic questions: What are
the basic objectives and specific goals of the
school? What methods of teaching and learning
are consistent with these basic objectives? What
will constitute the curriculum? Various founders
of colleges and universities have different answers to these questions. Throughout the world,
institutions of higher education have different
purposes, teaching and learning methods, and
curricula.
If a college or university system lacks a coherent educational philosophy, the result can be
a series of conflicting objectives and aims, random teaching and learning methods, and unstable, trendy curricula. Similarly, if a local public
school board appoints or elects members with
conflicting philosophies, an incoherent patchwork of aims, methods, and curricula may result.
A DILEMMA: LIBERAL ARTS
OR VOCATIONAL TRAINING?
Many students today, perhaps the majority, believe that the basic objective of all education, especially at the college or university level, is to
provide vocational training; that is, to prepare
students for a job or career. They believe that the
need for occupational skills should be the basis
of a curriculum; methods of teaching and learning should include whatever means are available
to communicate clear-cut vocational information; a diploma or college degree should be an
entry ticket to a good job. One student, studying philosophy because it was required in a vocational program, exclaimed in anguish during a
The Task of Philosophy  15
provocative class session, ìYouíre messing up my
mind! I didnít come here to think; I came for an
education.î One wonders whether such a student has connected a view of education with reflected comprehension of human nature, knowledge, and values. Are students to be trained only
in order to get a job? Should worthwhile knowledge be defined only as that which can be used
to earn a living? Is occupational competence the
only valuable purpose of education?
Many believe that if vocational training is the
sole content of education, the graduate enters
the marketplace unprepared. One reason is vocational training can become obsolete very quickly.
New technologies, new products, new management styles, and new industries appear so rapidly
that skills learned today are inadequate only a few
years later. Training of men and women solely
with occupational information often ignores
their need for a better understanding of themselves and the world. An education that has the
humanities at its core provides the student with
permanent knowledge, the ability to think critically, and exposure to powerful minds, inquiring
intellects, and events of human significance.
Whether vocational training takes place alongside such ìfreeing artsî (the literal meaning of
ìliberal artsî), at separate institutions, or in the
marketplace depends on the educational philosophies of individual institutions. Over a decade
ago a national magazine asserted that, in addition to good technical training, new leaders need
to be educated in the humanities.16 They need to
have the kind of understanding of the human
psycheóof the struggle against regressive and irrational forcesóthat comes from reading great
writers such as Sophocles, Plato, Shakespeare,
and Ibsen who make us see how difficult it is for
human beings to deal with each other.
Some people think that many of our leaders
display a lack of understanding about human nature, that they appropriate simple-minded psychological theories of what motivates people and
tend to believe that everyone is motivated by
the desire for money or to ìkeep up with the
Joneses.î They seem to lack the qualities gained
from exposure to the liberal arts and social
sciences, qualities that are essential in an effective
leader.
A commission funded by the Rockefeller
Foundation credits the humanities with enabling
men and women to make critical judgments
about ethics and social policy, to understand diverse cultures, and to interpret current events in
light of the past. The thirty-two-member group
described the humanities as integral to elementary and secondary education. They recommended that subjects such as languages, history,
philosophy, and English, which nurture critical
thinking, be taught early in the studentís academic career.17 Consistent with the commissionís
recommendations is the Institute for the Advancement of Philosophy for Children. Founded
in 1974, the Institute has been responsible for
the development of curriculum materials and
teaching methods that improve thinking and
problem-solving skills. For similar reasons, the
American Philosophical Association has active
committees concerned with the teaching of philosophy at all levels.
EVALUATING EDUCATION
Any evaluation of a school, a course, or a teacher
depends on the general philosophy of the evaluators, including their position on values, philosophy of education, and commitment to the humanities. Clearly, many educational philosophies
are possible, and evaluators disagree, whether
they are members of an accrediting team or students chatting in a cafeteria. The evaluation of a
college, course, or professor as ìgoodî is a
philosophical judgment that reflects a wide
range of other philosophical convictions. If people have no understanding of logic, ethics, and
metaphysics, their evaluations of philosophies of
education are of questionable worth because a
philosophy of education needs to be grounded
in an articulated philosophy.
The educational philosophy of a university
dedicated to research may differ legitimately
from the aims, methods, and curriculum of a
small teaching college. Both may have value if
16  Chapter 1
their respective philosophies are well implemented. A course or a teacher may be judged
ìgoodî if consistent with the philosophy of
their institution. Frequently, poor evaluations
expressed informally reflect primarily other criteria that are, at best, of secondary significance. To
avoid a course in physics because of its difficulty,
to degrade the University of Leipzig because it is
not well known by the average American student, or to rate Nietzsche poorly as a teacher because he was not entertaining is to render an unreasonable and superficial judgment. Sound
evaluations require thoughtfulness and philosophical awareness.
There are a multitude of problems facing
American education today. Within a democratic
society, how can we harmonize the different traditions out of which American higher education
springs? Where can moral and financial support
be found that will permit American scholarship
to maintain its freedom and standards? How can
a substantial relationship be established between
an increasingly technologically oriented culture
and the institutions and ideals of the humanities?
As we have tried to indicate, these questions
have no easy answers, but we agree with Professor Charles Frankel when he writes:
In the final analysis, however, these are the
problems of teachers and scholars whose
mission is the same as that of scholars anywhere.
That mission is to keep the tradition of disinterested learning alive; to add to the knowledge
possessed by the race; to keep some solid, just,
and circumspect record of the past; and to use
what knowledge, skill, and critical intelligence
exists for the improvement of the human estate.
This is the function of universities wherever
they are permitted to attend to their own
proper business.18
For most of its history,
philosophy has been
concerned with the
problems of everyday, human situations; in recent decades, however, many philosophers in the
Western world turned their attention almost exclusively to questions about the nature and role
of philosophy or to a discussion of the terms and
language through which thoughts are expressed.
A knowledge of terms and the structure and uses
of language is important, but we need not substitute the study of instrumentsólogic, semantics, and linguistic analysisófor the study of
the basic problemsóthe perennial problems of
philosophy.
Recently, however, a growing number of
philosophers have broadened the scope of their
interests. They are working with hospitals, business and industry to help solve the problems of
health care delivery and corporate communities.
Philosophers are professionals like doctors, lawyers, and tennis players: philosophers get paid for
being specialists in the area of ideas.
Many people today have become dissatisfied
with narrow analytic conceptions of philosophy;
in the 1980s, philosophy began to be concerned
with nontraditional fields, such as brain research,
cognitive science, and artificial intelligence; and
with new issues, such as animal rights, defining
life and death, establishing the nature and role of
technology in modern thought, and experimentation with human subjects; and with raising
philosophical questions in relation to outer
space, gender issues, literature, sports, violence,
social norms, and the environment. Moreover,
as is apparent from newsletters of the American
Philosophical Association, many philosophers
are giving attention to other topics such as ìThe
Black Experience,î ìFeminism and Philosophy,î
ìComputer Use In Philosophy,î and ìPhilosophy and Law.î Applied philosophy has captured
the interest of many philosophers who do not
regard linguistic analysis as the sole job of philosophy. In this book, we view philosophy as a
process of reflecting upon and criticizing our
most deeply held beliefs. We hope to show that
the activity of philosophy belongs to all thinking
persons.
The usefulness of philosophy is well attested
to in this excerpt:
The Task of Philosophy  17
Philosophy Today

Reflections

Far from being an academic luxury, philosophy
should play a central part in any well balanced
college or university curricula. The study of philosophy contributes distinctively and substantially to the development of studentsí critical
thinking. It enhances their ability to deal rationally with normative issues. It extends their
understanding of interdisciplinary questions. It
strengthens their grasp of our intellectual history and of our culture in relation to others. It
increases their capacity to articulate and assess
world views. And it improves their skills in writing and speaking. . . .
Philosophical reflection can be brought to
bear on any subject matter whatsoever; every
discipline raises questions which philosophical
investigation can help clarify; and every domain
of human existence confronts us with problems
on which philosophical reflection can shed light.
The study of philosophy can help students in
all the ways this suggests, and the philosophical
techniques they assimilate can help them both in
their other academic work and in their general
problem solving over the years.19
18  Chapter 1

Glossary Terms
AESTHETICS The branch of philosophy concerned
with art and the nature of the work of art.
CONCLUSION A proposition inferred from the
premises of an argument.
DEDUCTION An inference in which the conclusion
follows necessarily from one or more premises. When
the conclusion does so follow, the deduction is said
to be valid.
DIALECTIC As most frequently used by philosophers, the critical analysis of conceptions in order to
determine their meaning, implications, and presuppositions. Also, a method of reasoning used by
Socrates, Hegel, and others in which opposites are
reconciled.
EMPIRICISM (EMPIRICAL) The view that knowledge
comes from experience or through the senses, in opposition to rationalism.
EPISTEMOLOGY Theory of knowledge; the branch of
philosophy which studies the sources, nature, and validity of knowledge.
ETHICS The study of moral conduct. The term may
also be applied to the system or the code followed
(such as ìBuddhist ethics.î)
INDUCTION Reasoning that attempts to reach a
conclusion concerning all the members of a class after inspection of only some of them. Inductive
knowledge is empirical. The conclusion of an inductive argument, unlike that of a deductive one, is not
logically necessary.
INFERENCE A conclusion derived either from general premises (deduction) or from factual evidence
(induction). Not to be confused with implication;
one proposition is said to imply another when their
relation is such that if the first is true the second
must also be true.
LOGIC The branch of philosophy that deals with the
nature and problems of clear and accurate thinking
and argument.
METAPHYSICS A critical study of the nature of reality. Metaphysics is often divided into ontology and
cosmology.
PREMISE A proposition supporting or helping to
support a conclusion.
RATIONALISM The view that the mind has the power
to know some truths that are logically prior to experience and yet not analytic.
The Task of Philosophy 19
Chapter Review
THE MEANINGS OF PHILOSOPHY
1. Every individual has a philosophy, even though
he or she may not be aware of it.
2. The word philosophy is derived from the Greek
words philia (love) and sophia (wisdom) and
means ìthe love of wisdom.î
3. One must consider each approach to philosophy
to have a clear understanding of the many
meanings of philosophy and what particular
philosophers say about the nature and function
of philosophy.
WHY WE NEED PHILOSOPHY
1. Humanity has acquired a great new power in
science and technology; numerous techniques
for gaining greater security and comfort have
been developed. At the same time, people feel
insecure and anxious because they are uncertain
about the meaning of life and of which direction
they should take in life.
2. Philosophy, in conjunction with other disciplines, plays a central role in guiding us toward
new desires and aspirations.
TRADITIONAL BRANCHES OF PHILOSOPHY
1. The text is organized around basic issues of philosophy. The traditional branches of philosophy
are logic, metaphysics, epistemology, and value
theory.
2. Logic is the systematic study of the rules for the
correct use of supporting reasons, rules we can
use to distinguish valid arguments from specious
ones.
3. Metaphysics traditionally has been concerned
with the ultimate nature of things.
4. Epistemology is in general the branch of philosophy that studies the sources, nature, and validity of knowledge.
5. Value theory is concerned with the nature of
values; it can be subdivided into ethics, aesthetics, and social and political philosophy.
6. Ethics is concerned with questions of morality.
Within morality and ethics there are three major
areas: descriptive ethics, normative ethics, and
metaethics.
7. Aesthetics focuses on the theory of art and
beauty.
8. Social and political philosophy investigates value
judgments concerning the individual in society.
PHILOSOPHICAL METHODOLOGYó
SOCRATIC DIALECTIC
1. The basic method of philosophical inquiry is dialectical. The dialectic is the development of
thought through an interplay of ideas. Dialectical thinking attempts to develop a sustained pattern of argument in which the implications of
different positions are drawn out and contrasted
with each other.
THE USES OF PHILOSOPHY
1. Philosophy is inescapable; issues of metaphysics,
epistemology, values, and logic are part of
everyday living.
2. The study of philosophy nurtures the capacity
for making informed choices.
3. Specific personal and vocational uses add to the
benefits of philosophical studies.
VALUES AND EDUCATION
1. Philosophy of education is explored briefly as an
elaboration of the discussion of personal and vocational uses of philosophy.
2. To evaluate a college, course, or instructor, we
must determine what we value in these areas.
3. Evaluative issues in education depend on several
philosophical attitudes.
4. The application of general philosophical positions to educational problems is called philosophy of education.
5. A current educational dilemma is whether the
basic objective of all education is to provide vocational training or ìpermanent educationî of
the liberal arts.
PHILOSOPHY TODAY
1. Philosophy has in recent decades been concerned almost exclusively with questions about
the nature and role of philosophy or a discussion of the terms and language through which
thoughts are expressed.
2. Recently a growing number of some philosophers have broadened the scope of their interests. Applied philosophy, concerned with areas
such as brain research, cognitive science, artificial intelligence, definitions of life and death,
the nature and role of technology in modern
thought, gender issues, animal rights, value or
moral problems in medicine and business, and
so on, has captured the interest of many
philosophers.
REFLECTIONS
1. The usefulness of philosophy is well attested to
by its several theoretical and practical applications to human living.
20  Chapter 1
Study Questions and Projects
1. Is there justification for saying that our age is
facing unprecedented problems? Are these problems any different, except in degree and intensity, from the problems of past ages? Which
contemporary conditions or trends do you consider encouraging, and which discouraging?
2. Does each person need a philosophy? Can one
really choose whether he or she is to have a philosophy of life?
3. What justification can you give for saying that
some of the great issues of our time are philosophical problems? In what sense are some of
these issues also timeless?
4. Organize some of your present beliefs and convictions regarding life and the world into a
statement of no more than 2000 words. Keep
a copy of this statement of personal philosophy
and compare it with a similar statement that you
write toward the end of the course.
5. Has your secondary and college education developed in you any set of convictions or values
regarding your personal life, social relationships,
and the world in general? Should education be
concerned with such questions or only with descriptive knowledge in specialized areas?
6. Indicate the extent and areas of your agreement
or disagreement with the following statements:
(a) ìThere is no more direct way of elevating
our life than by elevating our ideas.î
óErnest Dimnet
(b) ìMake it thy business to know thyself,
which is the most difficult lesson in the
world.îóCervantes
(c) ìMoney buys everything except love, personality, freedom, immortality, silence, and
peace.îóCarl Sandburg
(d) ìThe great sickness of our age is aimlessness, boredom, and lack of meaning
and purpose in living.îóDr. Dana L.
Farnsworth
7. Philosophical journals are an important storehouse of current thinking in the field. Familiarize yourself with as many of them as you can
and see how many of them are in your library.
Fairly complete lists may be found in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy and in the Directory of
American Philosophers. The following is a partial
list: Ethics; The Humanist; International Philosophical Quarterly; The Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism; The Journal of Philosophy; The
Journal of the History of Ideas; The Journal of
the History of Philosophy; The Journal of Symbolic
Logic; The Monist; The Philosophical Forum; The
Philosophical Review; Philosophical Studies in Education; Philosophy and Phenomenological Re
The Meanings
of Philosophy
3. Philosophy is a rational attempt to look at
the world as a whole. Philosophy seeks to combine the conclusions of the various sciences and
human experience into some kind of consistent
world view. Philosophers wish to see life, not
with the specialized slant of the scientist or the
businessperson or the artist, but with the overall
view of someone cognizant of life as a totality. In
speaking of ìspeculative philosophy,î which he
distinguishes from ìcritical philosophy,î C. D.
Broad says, ìIts object is to take over the results
of the various sciences, to add to them the results
of the religious and ethical experiences of
mankind, and then to reflect upon the whole.
The hope is that, by this means, we may be able
to reach some general conclusions as to the nature of the universe, and as to our position and
prospects in it.î2
Although there are difficulties and dangers
in setting forth any world view, there also are
dangers in confining attention to fragments of
human experience. Philosophyís task is to give a
view of the whole, a life and a world view, and
to integrate the knowledge of the sciences with
that of other disciplines to achieve a consistent
whole. Philosophy, according to this view, attempts to bring the results of human inquiryó
religious, historical, and scientificóinto some
meaningful interpretation that provides knowledge and insight for our lives.
4. Philosophy is the logical analysis of language and the clarification of the meaning of
words and concepts. Certainly this is one function of philosophy. In fact, nearly all philosophers have used methods of analysis and have
sought to clarify the meaning of terms and the
use of language. Some philosophers see this as
the main task of philosophy, and a few claim this
is the only legitimate function of philosophy.
Such persons consider philosophy a specialized
field serving the sciences and aiding in the clarification of language rather than a broad field
reflecting on all of lifeís experiences. This outlook has gained considerable support during the
twentieth century. It would limit what we call
knowledge to statements about observable facts
and their interrelationsóthat is, to the business
of the various sciences. Not all linguistic analysts,
however, define knowledge so narrowly. Although they do reject and try to ìclean upî
many nonscientific assertions, many of them
think that we can have knowledge of ethical
principles and the like, although this knowledge
is also experientially derived. Those who take the
narrower view neglect, when they do not deny,
all generalized world views and life views, as well
as traditional moral philosophy and theology.
From this more narrow point of view, the aim of
philosophy is to expose confusion and nonsense
and to clarify the meaning and use of terms in
science and everyday affairs.
5. Philosophy is a group of perennial problems that interest people and for which philosophers always have sought answers. Philosophy
presses its inquiry into the deepest problems of
human existence. Some of the philosophical
questions raised in the past have been answered
in a manner satisfactory to the majority of philosophers. Many questions, however, have been
answered only tentatively, and many problems
remain unsolved.
What are philosophical questions? The question ìDid John Doe make a false statement on
his income tax return?î is merely a question of
fact. But the questions ìWhat is truth?î and
ìWhat is the distinction between right and
wrong?î have philosophical importance.
Most of us stop at timesósometimes because of startling events, often out of simple
curiosityóand think seriously about fundamental life issues: What is life and why am I here?
Why is there anything at all? What is the place of
life in this great universe? Is the universe friendly
or unfriendly? Do things operate by chance or
through sheer mechanism, or is there some plan
or purpose or intelligence at the heart of things?
Is my life controlled by outside forces, or do I
have a determining or even a partial degree of
control? Why do people struggle and strive for
their rights, for justice, for better things in the future? What do concepts like ìrightî and ìjusticeî
mean, and what are the marks of a good society?
Often men and women have been asked to
sacrifice their lives, if need be, for certain values
4  Chapter 1
and ideals. What are the genuine values of life and
how can they be attained? Is there really a fundamental distinction between right and wrong,
or is it just a matter of oneís own opinions?
What is beauty? Should religion count in a
personís life? Is it intellectually valid to believe in
God? Is there a possibility of a ìlife after death?î
Is there any way we can get an answer to these
and many related questions? Where does knowledge come from, and can we have any assurances
that anything is true?
These questions are all philosophical. The
attempt to seek answers or solutions to them has
given rise to theories and systems of thought,
such as idealism, realism, pragmatism, analytic
philosophy, existentialism, phenomenology, and
process philosophy. Philosophy also means the various theories or systems of thought developed by
the great philosophersóSocrates, Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza,
Locke, Berkeley, Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche, Royce,
James, Dewey, Whitehead, and others. Without
these people and their thoughts philosophy
would not have the rich content it has today.
Even though we may be unconscious of the fact,
we are constantly influenced by ideas that have
come down to us in the traditions of society.
We are living in a period that resembles
the late stages of the
Graeco-Roman civilization, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the
Industrial Revolution, when basic shifts took
place in human thinking, values, and practices.
Changes are occurring that reach to the foundations of human life and society. We now have immense power over nature, including outer space;
we have made giant strides in the areas of science, technology, agriculture, medicine, and the
social sciences. In this century, especially in the
last few decades, we have seen great advances
in societyómen and women live longer, travel
faster, have more comforts and labor-saving devices, and produce more goods in fewer hours
than ever before. The extension of the role of the
computer and the age of automation undoubtedly will eliminate more drudgery and further
increase production and reduce working hours.
Controlling new sources of energy from the
atom, the sun, the tides, and the winds is likely
to change our lives beyond even our wildest
imaginations.
Yet despite our amazing advances, many
thoughtful people are disturbed and anxious.
They are concerned that our physical power, scientific knowledge, and wealth stand in sharp
contrast with the failure of governments and
individuals to come to grips with the pressing intellectual and moral problems of life. Knowledge
seems divorced from values; it is possible to have
great power without insight.
Perhaps the most striking example is to be
found in the onset of a nuclear age, which we
have created through an application of scientific
and technological power. We are unable, however, to solve the question of arms control. Nuclear weapons cannot be realistically used in
the actual fighting of a war; using even one is
likely to lead to an earthly cataclysm. Despite the
appalling dangers of nuclear war, some people
argue that we need to manufacture nuclear
weapons as a means of deterring nuclear aggression by a potential enemy; that is, a nuclear war
cannot be planned with the aim of winning it.
Once again, we are in a paradoxical situation: we
are unable to offer a solution to a problem that
stems from our own ingenuity.
The twentieth century has been characterized by a war of ideas as well as of people, materials, and conflicting national interests. Irreconcilable philosophies compete for allegiance.
Earlier in the century, the difference between life
in the democratic and in the fascist countries was
not a difference in technology, or in science, or
even in general education; it lay in basic ideas,
ideals, and loyalties. In a similar way, communism challenged many of our beliefs and ideals.
Editorials, articles, books, films, and television commentators unite in appealing for a
The Task of Philosophy 5
Why We Need
Philosophy
redirection of our society. They believe that
we are adrift without moral and intellectual leadership. No doubt our period is characterized
by personal and social instability. We are at a
loss to form genuine communities that would
lend satisfaction and hope to their members; we
find commitment to selfishness and competition
rather than to self-interest and cooperation. Our
civilization often has been diagnosed; the diagnosticians are eloquent in their descriptions of
the diseases, but it is a rare individual who proposes a cure; the most the critics can agree on is
that it is time for a change.
Changes in customs and in history usually
begin with people who are convinced of the
worth of some ideal or who are captured by
some vision of a different way of life. Following
the Middle Ages, many people began to conceive of a way of life motivated by a belief that
life on this earth is worthwhile in itself. In the
broadest sense, this belief made possible the Renaissance, the Reformation, and our modern
world with its factories, mass production, money
and banks, rapid transportation, and, more recently, atomic power and exploration of outer
space. All these are calculated to make this world
better and to give us more control over it. But
unless we develop some fairly consistent and
comprehensive view of human nature, the nature of the total order within which we live, and
some reasonable scale of values based on an order beyond mere human desires, such things are
not likely to provide an enduring basis for our
world. Philosophy, in conjunction with other
disciplines, plays a central role in guiding us toward new desires and aspirations.
In his book The Illusion of Technique,3
William Barrett proposes that today, more than
any other time in history, it is necessary to place
the idea of scientific technique in a new relation
to life. As we have noted, ours is a society more
and more dominated by technique. Barrett is
convinced that modern philosophy must respond to technique and technology, or humanity will permanently lose purpose, direction, and
freedom.
. . . anyone who would argue for freedom today has to concern himself with the nature of
techniqueóits scope and its limitsó . . . The
question of technique is, in itself, an important
one for philosophyóand more important particularly for modern philosophy, which has so
often let matters of technique blind its vision.
More significantly still, the question bears
upon the uncertainties of a whole technological
civilization, which even as it wields its great
technical powers is unsure of their limits or
possible consequences.4
Historically, philosophical concerns have
been treated under
these broad categories:
logic, metaphysics, epistemology, and value theory. We have organized
our text around the basic issues of philosophy;
therefore we will merely glance at the definitions
of the traditional branches, trusting that the
chapters that follow will further develop these
definitions.
In addition to the broad categories mentioned, philosophy also deals with the systematic
body of principles and assumptions underlying a
particular field of experience. For example, there
are philosophies of science, education, art, music, history, law, mathematics, and religion. Any
subject pursued far enough reveals within itself
philosophical problems.
LOGIC
Philosophy endeavors to understand the nature
of correct thinking and to discover what is valid
reasoning. One thread running throughout the
history of philosophy is its appeal to reason, to
argumentation, to logic.
We all use arguments in everyday life to support our opinions and to refute the opinions
of others with whom we disagree. But how do we
distinguish between valid and invalid arguments?
Basically, an argument is simply the reasons
6  Chapter 1
Traditional
Branches
of Philosophy
(called the premises) for or against a position
(called the conclusion). An inference is a
